Voice Morphology, Case, and Argument Structure in Malagasy
Matt Pearson
Reed College

1. Introduction
The canonical Malagasy clause is divided into two constituents, the predicate
phrase (PredP), and a definite noun phrase here called the trigger. This is schematized in (1) (cf. Keenan 1995 for evidence for this bipartite clause structure).
(1)

[PredP

V .,. 1 [Trigger DP 1

When the predicate phrase is headed by a verb, that verb is marked for voice to indicate the grammatical function of the trigger. Examples are given in (2) (here and
throughout, the trigger is underlined; the morphological breakdown of each verb
is given in brackets, with the voice morphemes boldfaced). (2a) illustrates the
actor-trigger (AT) form, used when the external argument-here, the agent-is
the trigger of the clause. The theme-trigger (TT) form in (2b) is used when an
internal argument-here, the patient-functions as the trigger. Finally, the circumstantial-trigger (CT) form in (2c) is used when the trigger is an oblique element-here, the instrument with which the event is carried out. In each case, the
trigger follows the predicate phrase, occurring at the right periphery of the sentence. Within the predicate phrase, the order of elements is VSOX: non-trigger
external arguments appear right-adjacent to the verb, preceding internal arguments, which precede obliques.
(2) a. Mamono [m-aN-vono 1 akoho amin'ny antsy I1.Y. ..... IDP.<m!.i?g.\y.
AT.kili
m-Pfx-kill
chicken with-Det knife Det farmer
'Ir~J¥.@~~ kills chickens with the knife'
b. Vonoin' [ vono-in 1 ny mpamboly amin'ny antsy .1fY..... ¥;QrQ
TT.kill
kill-in
Det farmer
with-Det knife Det chicken
'The farmer kills ~ht;..~hi.~Js:~!!.~ with the knife'
c. Amonoan' [ aN-vono-an 1 ny mpamboly akoho !!y.....@.t~y
chicken Det knife
CT.kill
Pfx-kill-an
Det farmer
'The farmer kills chickens with ~.tl.t;.)g).Jf~'
In previous work (Pearson, to appear), I used evidence from binding, extraction,
and other domains to argue that the trigger is not the subject of the sentence, as
usually assumed, but is instead base-generated in the specifier of an A' -projection, TopicP, and linked to a null operator in the specifier of a lower projection,
WhP, as shown in (3) (abstracting away from surface word order; on the rightperipheral position of the trigger, see Pearson (2001)).
(3)

[TopP

Ir.i,gg\lxi Top

[WhP

0Pi

[TP

V ... ti ... III

The analysis in (3) suggests a novel approach to the voice alternations in (2):
Generally, voice morphology is taken to encode active/passive-like alternations in

229

the mapping of thematic roles to the subject (nominative Case-checking) position.
However, if the trigger is not the subject of the clause but a topic linked to an A'chain, it is possible that voice morphology instead indicates the position from
which A'-extraction takes place, with the AT form in (2a) marking subject extraction, the TT form in (2b) marking object extraction, and the CT form in (2c)
marking oblique extraction.
Under this approach, voice in Malagasy is less like voice in English and
more like wh-agreement, of the sort which Chung (1998) documents for Chamorroo In A' -extraction contexts in Chamorro, regular subject agreement of the sort
shown in (4) is replaced by special morphology indicating whether the extracted
element is a subject, object, or oblique, as in (5). In Pearson (to appear) I suggested that Malagasy voice marking is a 'generalized' version of this type of marking:
While in Chamorro wh-agreement is confined to questions, relative clauses, and
the like, in Malagasy it appears in all clause types due to a requirement that the
specifier of WhP be filled in every clause.
(4)

kareta
Ha-fa'gasi si Juan i
3s-wash
Det Juan Det car
'Juan washed the car'

kareta?
(sub). extraction)
(5) a. Hayi f<um>a'gasi i
who urn-wash
Det car
'Who washed the car?'
b. Hafa f<in>a'gasese-nfia
si Henry para hagu? (ob). extraction)
what in-wash.Prog-3s.Lnk Det Henry for you
'What is Henry washing for you?'
C. Hafa para
fa'gase-rnrnu ni kareta?
(obi. extraction)
ObI car
what Fut 0-wash-2s
'What are you going to wash the car with?'
In this paper I focus on the voice affixes themselves and propose an account of
their distribution. Specifically, I argue that they are realizations of light verbs and
Case-checking heads, which combine with the root through head-to-head movement. The distribution of the affixes is determined by the positions from which,
and through which, the null operator in (3) moves on its way to the specifier of
WhP. For example, the actor-topic prefix m- is treated as a nominative Casechecking head, which gets spelled out just in case the operator raises through its
specifier. (My analysis is thus in the spirit of Guilfoyle, Hung, & Travis (1992),
who also associate voice morphemes with Case licensing.)

2. The Morphology of voice
Before proceeding with this analysis, I offer a quick overview of Malagasy voice
morphology. Verbs in Malagasy are formed from roots, some of which function
independently in the language, either as nouns or as stative predicates. To form a
verb stem, the root combines with one of a small set of verbal prefixes (glossed

230

'Pfx' in the examples), of which the two most common are aN- and i-. Some
examples of roots and the verb stems formed from them are given in (6).
(6)

ROOT

VERB STEM

asa
fefy
vavaka

'work, task'
'enclosure'
'prayer'

i-asa
i-fefy
i-vavaka

'work'
'be fenced'
'pray'

feno
soratra
tapaka

'full'
'writing'
'broken'

aN-feno [ameno]
aN-soratra [anoratra]
aN-tapaka [anapaka]

'write'

'fill'
'break'

Although the choice between aN- and i- is lexically determined, it does correlate
to some degree with transitivity: aN- stems are almost always transitive, while istems tend to be intransitive. As illustrated in (7), there are a large number of
roots which can take either prefix, where aN- forms a transitive stem and i- forms
its intransitive counterpart:
(7)

i-haja
i-sasa
i-voha

'be respected'
'wash oneself
'be open'

aN-haja [anaja]
aN-sasa [anasa]
aN-voha [amoha]

'respect (tr.)'
'wash (tr.)'
'open (tr.)'

Additional affixes are attached to roots and stems to mark voice. There are five
morphologically distinct voice forms in Malagasy, listed in the table below an
illustrated using aN-tafi 'wrap, dress' and aN-velar 'unroll, spread out' (two of a
handful of stems which can occur in all five forms). The actor-trigger (AT) voice
is formed by prefixing m- to the stem; while the circumstantial-trigger (CT) voice
is formed with the suffix -an. The other three voices are usually grouped together
as the theme-topic (TT) voices. These are formed by adding the suffix -an or -in,
or the prefix a-. Notice that the verbal prefix is absent in the TT forms, a fact to
which I return in the next section. 1
EXAMPLES

VOICE TEMPLATE
AT
m- Pfx- ROOT
Pfx- ROOT -an

CT

ROOT -an
TT
ROOT -in
a-

>
>
aN-tafi-an
>
aN-velar-an >
tafi-an
>
>
velar-an
tafi-in
>
>
velar-in
a-tafi
>
>
a-velar
m-aN-tafi
moaN-velar

ROOT

manafy
mamelatra
anafiana
amelarana
tafiana
velarana
tafina
velarina
atafy
avelatra

Examples of these five forms are given in (8)-(10). The AT form is used when the
trigger is the subject of the clause-that is, the sole 'core' argument of an intran-

231

sitive verb (8a), or the external argument of a transitive verb (8b). The TT voices
are used when the trigger is the direct or indirect object of a transitive verb (9)
(see sections 4 and 5 for more on the distribution of these affixes).2 (10) illustrates
the CT form, which is used when the trigger bears some oblique role such as instrument, location, or benefactee.
(8) a. Mipetraka [m-i-petrak 1 any Antsirabe !!y.... .Y!<hjy~yy
AT.live
m-Pft-live there Antsirabe Det woman
'IlW.Wgw<W,lives in Antsirabe'
b. Manoratra [ m-aN-sorat 1 taratasy !!y..... .mQj@.!!tr.~
m-Pft-write letter
AT.write
Det student
'JJw..stg4.~m. is writing a letter'
(9) a. Tapahin' [tapak-in 1 ny lehilahy p.1. .....Y!l·A~t!!91.
TT.cut
cut-in
Det men
Det vine.rope
'The men cuqhn,j!!~.!:9.P.~'
b. Soratan' [sorat-an 1 ny mpianatra !!y.....w.~!!ffi~y
TT. write write-an Det student
Det letter
'The student is writing fu~..1.~.tt~(
c. Atao
[a-taov 1 p.1. .....fjQm.®@.~.. .x~h~tm
TT.make a-make
Det preparation all
, AlUA~. PX~'pWi\tjgJJ..s are being made'
(10) a. Amonoan' [ aN-vono-an 1 ny mpamboly akoho
!!y......@.tsY
CT.kill
Pfx-kill-an
Det farmer
chicken Det knife
'The farmer kills chickens wj.th.t))'!<.k!)tf~'
b. ltoeran' [i-toer-an 1 ny ankizy· .~9. .... J~@'Q .. jQ
CT.live
Pft-live-an Det children this house this
'The children live jJJ...th£\t.hQg~~.'
c. Amonoan' [ aN-vono-an 1 ny mpamboly akoho 1).1. .... .Y.~·h~lJ.y'
Pft-kill-an
Det farmer
chicken Det guest
CT.kill
'The farmer is killing chickens f.QLth!<.gg~~t~'

I now consider each of the morphemes in the above table in tum. I start with the
verbal prefixes, and then turn to the AT prefix m- and the TT suffix -in. Next I
consider the TT prefix a-. Finally, I discuss -an, found in the remaining TT form,
and in the CT form.

3. The verbal prefIxes
As shown in the table above, the verbal prefixes aN- and i- appear in AT clauses,
where the subject is extracted, and in CT clauses, where an oblique element is
extracted. However, these prefixes are absent in TT clauses, where an object is
extracted. What's the reason for this? Recall that aN- and i- form verb stems from
roots, many of which can occur independently: For instance, (12) shows that aNmay attach to a one-place stative root to form a two-place verb, adding an agent
argument in the process.

232

(11) a. F eno ny.... .tilXQMi!!lgy
full Det bottle
'IJ.w..Q.9.nl!< is full'
b. Mameno [m-aN-feno ] ny tavoahangy ny.....y.~Ny.~y.y.
AT.fill
m-Pft-full
Det bottle
Det woman
'JJW.WWJ:l.®' is filling the bottle'
Thinking in tenns of a Hale & Keyser approach to argument structure, this suggests that the verbal prefixes are light verbs, which take a root or one-place predicate as their complement, and project an external argument in their specifier. This
is schematized in (12) (here and below, I abstract away from head-to-head movement; I assume that verb adjoins successively to each head in its extended projection, raising as high as T before Spell Out). Assuming that the prefixes are light
verbs (and assuming furthennore that obliques are merged outside of vP; cf.
section 6), the proper generalization is as follows: The light verb v is suppressed
(rendered covert) when an operator undergoes A' -extraction from its complement.
(12)

[TP [vp DP [v' v [vp DP [v' V ] 111]
PftROOT

The connection between extraction and the spell-out of the light verb receives a
straightforward explanation in tenns of phases. In his account of successive cyclic
movement, Chomsky (1999, 2000) divides the clause into two domains, a lower
phase, identified with vP, and an upper phase, identified with CP. In accordance
with the Phase Impenetrability Condition (13) (cf. Chomsky 2000, p. 108), a constituent can move out of a phase only by first moving to its left edge, merging as a
specifier of the highest head in the phase. If this is correct, then in order for an
operator to extract from the complement of the light verb in Malagasy, it must
first raise to become a specifier ofvP, as shown in (14). In other words, SpecvP is
an escape hatch for A'-movementto SpecWhP in IT clauses:
(13)

In phase a with head H, the domain of H is not accessible to operations
outside a; only H and its edge (i.e., the specifier(s) ofHP) are accessible to
such operations.

(14)

[WhP 0Pi [TP [vp ti [v' DP [v' v [vp ... ti .. · ]

11 J) 1

I propose that the prefixes aN- and i_ alternate with a 0 realization of the light
verb. The empty light verb has a feature which attracts an operator into its specifier. By contrast, the overt light verbs aN- and i- lack this feature, and so may not
host an operator. In other words, extraction from the lower phase is possible only
when the head of the lower phase v is spelled out as the 0 allomorph; when v is an
overt light verb, this renders it impenetrable for A'-extraction.
Alternations of this sort are well known in the head of the upper phasethat is, the complementizer head. In languages such as Irish, for example, the
fonn of the complementizer depends in part on whether there is an A' -operator in
the specifier of CP. The usual finite complementizer is go, as shown in (15); how-

233

ever, when an operator raises to (or through) SpecCP, the complementizer a is
used instead, as shown in (16). I suggest that the alternation in Malagasy between
the verbal prefixes aN· or i· and 0 is a lower phase analogue of this complement.
izer alternation: In each case, the availability of a landing site or escape hatch for
A·bar movement correlates with how the head of the phase is realized. (Examples
taken from Carnie, Harley, & Pyatt 2000, Guilfoyle 2000, and Chung & McClos·
key 19S7, respectively.)
(15)

bhfaca se an madra 1
Ceapaim [ go
think. 1s
Comp saw
he the dog
'I think that he saw the dog'

(16) a. Caide a
chuir sin i do cheann?
what Comp put that in your head
'What put that in your head?'
b. an bhean [Op a
chuir t·isteach air 1
the woman
Comp put
in
on.it
'the woman who applied for it'

4. Intransitive and monotransitive verbs
Next I turn to the AT prefix m· and the TT suffix ·in. Recall that m· appears on
the verb when the transitive or intransitive subject is the trigger, as in (17) and
(1 Sa), while ·in appears when the transitive object is the trigger, as in (lSb):

(17)

Mitomany [ m·i·tomani
AT.cry
m·Pfx·cry
'IhH\.iXI is crying'

1 rJ.,Y. .... '?~~y.iWy
Det girl

(IS) a. Mamaky [m·aN·vaki 1 boky ny.... '?~y!Wy
AT.read
m·Pfx·read book Det girl
'Ih~.g~r! is reading a book'
b. Vakin' [vaki·in 1 ny zazavavy .J;l.Y. .....~9.~y.
TT.read read·in
Det girl
Det book
'The girl is reading th~..9.9.9.k'
Assuming that Malagasy is a nominative·accusative language, it seems that AT
marking correlates with nominative Case, while TT marking correlates with accu·
sative Case. I propose that m· and ·in are realizations of the functional heads
which license nominative and accusative Case, respectively: When the operator
which raises to SpecWhP has a nominative Case feature to check, the head which
checks it is spelled out on the verb as m·, and when the operator has an accusative
Case feature, the head which checks that feature is spelled out as ·in.
First of all, consider the sentences in (19) and (20), featuring a TT verb
prefixed with a·. As these examples show, the predicate·internal subject may be
overt, as in the (b) sentences; or it may be covert, as in the (a) sentences, in which
case the agent is construed as unknown or arbitrary. Notice that overt subjects im·

234

mediately follow the verb, which is suffixed with the linking morpheme, glossed
'Lnk' in the examples (this linking morpheme is realized as -y between two noncontinuant consonants, otherwise as -n '; I assume that the underlying form of this
morpheme is -ny).
(19) a. Atosika [a-tosek 1 ))'Y..... YiltQ
TT.push a-push
Det stone
'Someone is pushing X1W.. ~~9.Do~' or 'Th.()..~tQ):).!< is being pushed'
b. Atosiky L a-tosek-ny 1 ny vehivavy )).Y.. ".YiltQ
TT.push a-push-Lnk Det woman
Det meal
'The woman is pushing tlW.~.tQ!W'
(20) a. Aroso
[ a-roso 1 ny vahiny !W.....~*ilfQ
TT.serve a-serve Det guest Det meal
'Someone serves the guests )Jw..m\!.~\' or ']1W..my.~1 is served to the guests'
b. Aroson' [a-roso-ny 1 ny vehivavy ny vahiny !1Y..... ~.*-f,l.f9.
TT.serve
a-serve-Lnk Det woman
Det guest Det meal
'The woman is serving the guests ~.h'tl..m\!.f,l.r

Although the linking morpheme surfaces only on stems taking the a- prefix, I will
assume that it is also present on stems ending in -in and -an when they have overt
subjects, but fails to surface because of fusion with the n ofthe voice suffix:
(21) a. Vakina [vaki-in J !1Y... J:>.9.Ky'
TT.read read-in Det book
'Ih'tl.J?.9.9.K is being read'
b. Vakin' [vaki-in-ny 1 ny zazavavy )).y.... .J?Q~
TT.read read-in-Lnk Det girl
Det book
'The girl is reading Xh\!..p.9.9.k'

Since the linking morpheme is required to license an overt subject in the predicate
phrase, I will assume that it is located in the functional head which checks nominative Case. Adapting an analysis due to Travis (1994), I identify this as the event
head E, which selects vP as its complement, as shown in (22). In addition to
checking nominative Case, the event head introduces (or binds) the event argument of the clause, and is in turn selected by the tense head. As an examination of
the forms above shows, the linking morpheme is in complementary distribution
with the AT prefix m-: I will therefore assume (following Travis (1994» that the
m- prefix is also in E. So m- and -ny are alternate realizations of the nominative
Case-checking head.
(22)

[TP T [EP

E-[NOMj

[vp DP [v' v ",

11 J 1

-ny / mWhat determines how E will be realized? Given my theory of triggers, this correlates with whether the subject (i.e., the nominative Case-marked argument) undergoes A' -movement or not: When the subject is an operator which raises to

235

SpecWhP, the verb carries the prefix m-, and when the subject remains inside TP,
the verb carries the suffix -ny. To capture this alternation, I propose that how the
E head is realized depends on whether or not it contains an EPP feature in addition to its Case feature-that is, whether or not it projects a specifier, triggering
raising of the nominative DP (cf. Chomsky 1999,2000): When E carries an EPP
feature, it is spelled out as m-, and when it lacks an EpP feature, it is spelled out
as -ny. I will refer to a head containing an EPP feature as strong, and a head
which .lacks an EPP feature as weak.
When the subject is an operator which raises to SpecWhP to check a feature
of Wh, it must pass through the specifier of EP in order to check its Case feature.
Consequently, E will have to be strong, and so it will be spelled out as m-. The
structure is shown in (23) (abstracting away from head-to-head movement).
However, when the subject does not raise to SpecWhP, it does not need to pass
through SpecEP in the overt syntax. In principle E could strong or weak in such
cases. Suppose that economy dictates in favor of the weak form, and so the verb
carries the suffix -ny. In this case, the subj ect is spelled out in its base position,
SpecvP, as in (22), and checks its Case via an Agree relation, without movement.
(23)

[WhP

Opi

[TP [EP

ti

[E·

E [vp ti [v· V ...
mPfx-

V

]] ]] ] ]

ROOT

My analysis of the TT suffix -in takes essentially the same form. Alongside the
nominative Case-checking head E, I assume there is a second functional head
responsible for checking accusative Case, located between the light verb and the
root. Following Travis (1991), I identify this as the aspect head, which projects an
AspP, selected as the complement of the light verb, as in (24).
(24)

[vp (DP) [v·

v
(Pfx-)

[AspP

ASP-lACC] [vp DP [v·
0

V

] ] ]] ]

ROOT

Like the event head, the aspect head is spelled out differently depending on whether it is strong or weak. When it is strong, and triggers raising of the object for
accusative Case checking, it is spelled out as -in; otherwise it surfaces as 0. When
the verb is intransitive, and Asp lacks an accusative Case feature altogether, the 0
variant will be selected. When the verb is transitive, either variant may be selected. Normally the 0 variant will be selected, and the direct object will remain in
situ, checking its Case feature without movement, as in (24). However, when the
direct object is an operator, its Case is checked via overt movement to SpecAspP.
In such cases the aspect head must be strong, and so the suffix -in will be inserted.
From SpecAspP the operator raises to the edge of the lower phase, attracted by
the phonetically empty light verb, before raising out of the lower phase to SpecWhP. This is summarized in (25):
(25)

[WhP

0Pi ... [vP ti [v· (DP)

V

o

236

[AspP

ti

[Asp·

Asp [vp ti
-in

V
ROOT

]] ]]]]

5. Ditransitive constructions
Although the majority of monotransitive verbs mark the TT voice using the suffix
-in, there are a number of verbs which take the suffix -an instead, or the prefix a-,
as illustrated in (9) above. More often, however, -an and a- are used with ditransitive verbs. As Paul (1999) discusses, ditransitives in Malagasy fall into various
semantic classes: One class, illustrated by roso 'serve' in (26), includes verbs of
transmission, selecting a goal or recipient and a locatum: Here -an is used when
the goal is the trigger (26b), while a- is used when the locatum is the trigger (26c).
A second class of ditransitives is illustrated by didi 'cut' in (27): This class includes verbs which select a patient, and an additional argument denoting an
instrument acted upon by the agent to bring about a change in the patient. With
verbs of this type, -an is used when the patient is the trigger (27b), while a- is
used when the instrument is the trigger (27c):

(26) a. Mandroso [m-aN-roso ] sakafo ny vahiny )).Y .... mp!IDJJ?.9JY.
AT. serve m-Pfx-serve meal Det guest Det farmer
'Th<::..fw.m.er serves the guests a meal'
b. Rosoana [roso-an] sakafo !1y.....y.Mi!ly.
TT.serve serve-an meal
Det guest
'Il;1,e.g\l&~t.~ are serveda meal'
c. Aroso
[ a-roso] ny vahiny p.y..... ~.*afQ
TT.serve a-serve Det guest Det meal
'The.me.a.1 is served to the guests'
(27) a. Mandidy [m-aN-didi ] antsy ny hena p.y..... mp!IDJP.9Jy
AT.cut
m-Pfx-cut
knife Det meat Det farmer
'The..fw.m!<r. cuts the meat with a knife'
b. Didiana [ didi-an ] antsy )).Y .....I;1,<: .!l(1,
TT.cut
cut-an
knife Det meat
'Ihe.me.a~ is cut with the knife'
c. Adidy [ a-didi ] ny hena )).y .... !!!W!Y.
TT.cut a-cut
Det meat Det knife
'Th.e.}gl.if~ is used to cut the meat'
The verbs which take both -an and a- TT forms constitute the double object verbs
of Malagasy-that is, those verbs which allow two internal DP arguments. Comparing the sentences in (26) above, we see that the trigger of the a- clause in (c)
corresponds to the leftmost object in the actor-topic sentence in (a) (usually
indefinite and adjacent to the verb), while the trigger of the -an clause in (b)
corresponds to the rightmost object in (a). This pattern holds for (27). Following
Dryer (1986), I will refer to the object farther from the verb as the primary object
(PO), and the object closer to the verb as the secondary object (SO), as in (28).
Hence the proper generalization is that the -an form indicates that the PO of a
double object construction has undergone raising to SpecWhP, while the a- form
indicates that the SO has undergone raising.

237

so

(28)

PO

Mandroso
sakafo
ny vahiny
AT.serve
meal
Det guest
'The fanner serves the guests a meal'
Mandidy
antsy
ny hena
AT .cut
knife
Det meat
'The fanner cuts the meat with a knife'

ny mpamboly
Det fanner
ny mpamboly
Det fanner

Following Marantz (1993), I assume that double object constructions are really
app/icative constructions in which the applicative morpheme is null. As schematized in (29) below, Marantz treats the applicative morpheme as a kind of light
verb, which selects a phrase containing the lexical root as its complement (cf. Larson 1988). The PO merges as the specifier of the applicative head, while the SO
merges within its complement. Based on data from Bantu applicatives, Marantz
argues that the structure in (29) compositionally represents the complex event
denoted by an applicative construction, such that the PO is interpreted as affected
by the sub-event denoted by the complement of the applicative head. Hence, for
verbs taking a goal and a locatum, it is the goal which will be mapped to the PO
function, while verbs taking a patient and an instrument will map the patient to
the PO function.
(29)

VP
~
V'
primary (affected) object ~
DP
patient, goal/recipient
~
V
VP
~
Appl
secondary object
~
DP
V'
locatum, instrument
~
V
ROOT

Under this analysis, the a- prefix receives a similar treatment to m- and -in, discussed earlier. Suppose that in double object constructions, the Case feature ofthe
PO is checked by the Asp head, which selects the structure in (29); while the Case
feature of the SO (partitive?) is checked by a lower functional head F, which takes
the VP containing the root as its complement and projects an FP, selected as the
complement of the applicative head. As with E and Asp, assume that the F head
may be strong or weak, where the prefix a- spells out a strong F head. When the
SO is an operator attracted to SpecWhP, its Case is checked in Spec of FP by a
strong F, and the preflx a- appears on the verb; otherwise the SO remains in situ,
and the F head is nulL The structure is given in (30): The SO raises first to SpecFP to check Case. It then raises further to the edge of the lower phase (forcing v to
be null) before raising on to SpecWhP.
(30)

[WhP

0Pi ...

[,p

ti [v' (DP)

V [AspP

o

238

[vp DP

[FP

ti

[F'

F [vp ti ... V ...
aROOT

As for -an, I treat this suffix as the applicative morpheme in (29). When the operator in SpecWhP raises from the PO position, the applicative head which takes the
PO as its specifier is spelled out as -an, as schematized in (31). When the PO remains in situ, the applicative head is null. 3
(31)

[WhP

0Pi ... [vp t; [v' (DP) V [AspP ti Asp [vp t; V [FP '"

o

-an

V ]]]]]]
ROOT

In support of treating -an as a spell-out of the applicative morpheme, observe the
following: First, it seems that a ditransitive verb in Malagasy accepts the -an TT
form if and only if it can occur in a double object construction. Consider the verb
stem aN-petrak 'put' in (32), which arguably selects two arguments, a locatum
and a goal. As shown in (32b), 'put' does not license a double object construction;
rather, the goal must take the form of a PP, as in (32a). (32c) shows that, as
expected, the -an TT form is also disallowed. This is presumably because the goal
of a putting event is not normally understood to be affected by the action.
(32) a. Mametraka [m-aN-petrak ] boky eo
ambonin'ny seza ny.....~.!g!\
AT.put
m-Pfx-put
book there on-Det
chair Det child
'Th."..Q)J.iJct is putting books on the chair'
b. *Mametraka [m-aN-petrak] boky n y seza !).y. .... ~.~
AT.put
m-Pfx-put
book Det chair Det child
'Ih"..Q)J.iJct is putting books on the chair'
c. * Petrahana [petrak-an] boky !)..Y. .... ~.".~~
TT.put
put-an
book Det chair
'IMt9h1!-Jx is having books put on it'
On the other hand, the -an TT form can sometimes be used to convert an intransitive stem into a transitive stem by 'promoting' a locative adjunct to the role of
affected object. Consider the stem i-petrak 'sit', the intransitive counterpart of
aN-petrak: Being intransitive, this stem would not be expected to take TT morphology. However, my consultant allows the -an TT form when the location' ny
seza 'the chair' is the trigger, as in (33b)-but crucially only if the chair is understood as affected by the act of sitting on it; otherwise the CT form would be used.
I take the patterns in (32) and (33) as evidence that the TT form with -an marks
A' -extraction of an affected object in an applicative construction.
(33) a. Mipetraka [m-i-petrak ] amin'ilay seza ny..... ?;~.<.\
AT.sit
m-Pfx-sit
on-that
chair Det child
'Ih"..Q)).j.!.ct is sitting on that chair'
b. Petrahana [petrak-an 1 jt~y....~~?;<.\
TT.sit
sit-an
that chair
'Th.~~..9b..~jX is being sat in'
One question remains, namely: Why is -an is spelled out only if its specifier raises
out? Here I follow Sportiche (1992) in adopting a generalized version of the

239

'doubly-filled COMP' filter (34). In accordance with this filter, -an is spelled out
when its specifier contains a trace; otherwise the applicative head is null. Note
that (34) is meant to hold generally: As an examination of the structures in this
paper will show, each of the projections I posit (with one exception, which I return to below) has an empty head, an empty specifier, or both, at Spell Out.
(34)

If H is a head containing some feature F, • [HP XP [H· HO ... ] ] when XP
and HO both overtly encode F.

6. The circumstantial voice
I have now provided analyses of the AT form and the three TT forms in the table
in section 2. This leaves the CT voice, used when the trigger is an oblique-that
is, an element which requires a preposition in clauses where it does not function
as the trigger. Examples are given in (35b) and (36b), showing CT clauses with
locative and instrumental triggers, respectively.
(35) a. Mitoetra [m-i-toer ] ao
amin'io trano io ny.....~t~y
AT.live
m-Pft-live here in-this house this Det children
'Ib.t;.fh.H\.\nm live in that house'
b. Itoeran' [i-toer-an-ny
] ny ankizy t9. ..... IT.®.9.....t9.
CT.live
Pft-live-an-Lnk Det children this house this
'The children live jJ;uhll,thQ]'!.~~'
(36) a. Mamono [m-aN-vono] akoho amin'ny antsy nY.....ffip!'lm.Q.9h':
AT.kill
m-pfx-kill
chicken with-Det knife Del farmer
'Ib.t;JllXm~r kills chickens with the knife'
b. Amonoan' [ aN-vono-an-ny] ny mpamboly akoho 1).y ..... !illt~y.
CT. kill
pfx-kill-an-Lnk
Det farmer
chicken Det knife
'The farmer kills chickens M.th.th!<.!mif'"
Notice that the CT form does not include any new morphemes, but rather a combination of morphemes found in other voice forms. Like the TT forms, the CT
takes the linking morpheme -ny, indicating that the E head is weak and the subject
is Case-licensed in SpecvP. The CT also includes the suffix -an, which means that
the operator raises from the specifier of an applicative head. But unlike the TT
form with -an, the root carries a verbal prefix. Since by assumption the lower
phase is opaque to A' -extraction when a verbal prefix is present, it follows that
the operator in SpecWhP in a CT clause has raised from somewhere outside ofvP.
Putting these pieces together, I conclude that the applicative head in
Malagasy may be introduced in either the lower phase or the higher phase. In
'low' applicatives, the applicative head merges with the VP containing the root.
Its specifier is a DP which checks accusative Case under agreement with the Asp
head, and is interpreted as an 'affected object'. In 'high' applicatives, by contrast,
the applicative head merges with some larger projection, possibly vP. Its specifier
does not contain a DP bearing accusative Case and interpreted as affected, but
rather a PP. A possible structure is given in (37).4

240

(37)

[vP PP [v'

V [vp DP v AspP
App\

111

Extraction of an operator from this higher applicative position yields the combination of morphemes associated with the CT voice, as shown in (38): The subject
and object remain in situ, their Case-licensing heads spelled out as -ny and 0,
respectively. The operator raises from the specifier of the higher applicative head,
causing its head to be spelled out as -an, in accordance with the 'doubly-filled
COMP' filter. No extraction takes place from vP, and so the light verb surfaces as a
prefix on the verb stem. To explain the absence of a preposition in CT clauses, we
may assume (a) that the operator is of category PP, and/or (b) that the oblique
operator in SpecWhP (comparable to dont in French) does not need Case.
(38)

[WhP 0Pi [TP [EP E [yp ti V [vp (DP) v [AspP... V 1111111
-ny
-an
PfxROOT

One apparent problem with (38) is that the vP projection violates the 'doubly-filled COMP' filter discussed above: The head of vP is spelled out as a verbal prefix,
while the specifier of vP contains the in situ subject. There are various possible
solutions to this problem. For example, we could simply expand the tree so that
the subject and the verbal prefix end up in different projections. A second,
perhaps more interesting possibility is that vP, by virtue of being a phase, is
somehow exempt from the 'doubly-filled COMP' filter. Adopting Chomsky's
(1999) idea that Spell Out operates cyclically, we might speculate that the 'doubly-filled COMP' filter (plausibly a condition on Spell Out) applies only within a
given cycle. Suppose that the head of a phase and its specifier are spelled out in
different cycles, then it follows that vP would be able to have an overt head cooccurring with an overt specifier.

7. Conclusion
In this paper I have argued that the morphemes which combine to form the different voices in Malagasy are realizations of heads which attach to the root via headto-head adjunction in the syntax. The verb stem-forming prefixes are light verbs,
which alternate with a null variant when A' -extraction from the lower phase takes
place. The AT prefix m-, the TT prefix a-, and the TT suffix -in are strong Caselicensing heads which surface just in case an operator raises through their specifiers. Finally, the suffix -an, found on the CT and on one of the TT forms, is an
applicative head, which surfaces when the applicative argument raises out of its
specifier, in accordance with a generalized 'doubly-filled COMP' filter.

Endnotes
ACKNOWLEDGMENT: Thanks to Noro Ramahatafandry for providing much of
the data for this paper.

241

I. For discussion of the rules for deriving the surface forms from their
underlying representations, see Keenan & Polinsky (1998), Erwin (1996), Paul
(1996aJb). Here I will mention only that when a consonant occurs at the end of a
phonological word, an epenthetic a is inserted after it, in accordance with a surface ban on closed syllables (e.g., velar-an> velarana).
2. Note that the TT suffixes -in and -an are generally treated not as
separate voice markers, but as lexically-conditioned allomorphs of a single marker. However, Rahajarizafy (1960) notes that there are a handful of verbs which
can take either suffix, with a concomitant difference in argument structure (see
Pearson 2001 for discussion). Ileana Paul (p.c.) informs me that her consultants
reject Rahajarizafy's examples, allowing a stem to take -in or -an in the TT form,
but not both. Since my speaker accepts Rahajarizafy's examples, I will treat -in
and -an as separate morphemes-while acknowledging that the distinction between them may be disappearing for some speakers.
3. Notice that in the case of (35), the Asp head is null, rather than surfacing as -in, as expected. To capture this, I posit a morphological filter which blocks
-in from attaching to a verb stem which already carries a suffix.
4. Because a clause can contain multiple PPs, I must assume that the higher applicative projection can be recursive. (It is possible that the lower applicative
projection is recursive as well, although no more than projection will contain a DP
specifier interpreted as an affected object.)

References

Carnie, Andrew, Heidi Harley, and Elizabeth Pyatt. 2000. VSO ordering as
raising out of IP? Some evidence from Old Irish. The syntax of verb initial
languages, ed. by Andrew Carnie and Eithne Guilfoyle, 39-59. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Chomsky, Noam. 1999. Derivation by phase. MIT Occasional Papers in
Linguistics 18. Cambridge, MA: MITWPL.
Chomsky, Noam. 2000. Minimalist inquiries: the framework. Step by step: Essays
in minimalist syntax in honor of Howard Lasnik, ed. by Roger Martin, David
Michaels, and Juan Uriagereka, 89-155. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chung, Sandra. 1998. The design of agreement: evidence from Chamorro.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Chung, Sandra. and James McCloskey. 1987. Government, barriers and smallclauses in Modem Irish. Linguistic Inquiry 18.173-237.
Dryer, Matthew. 1986. Primary objects, secondary objects, and antidative.
Language 62.808-845.
Erwin, Sean. 1996. Quantity and moras: an amicable separation. The structure of
Malagasy, vol. I, ed. by Matthew Pearson and Ileana Paul, 2-30. Los Angeles:
UCLA Department of Linguistics.
Guilfoyle, Eithne. 2000. Tense and N-features in Irish. The syntax of verb initial
languages, ed. by Andrew Carnie and Eithne Guilfoyle, 61-73. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

242

Guilfoyle. Eithne, Henriette Hung, and Lisa Travis. 1992. Spec of IP and Spec of
VP: two subjects in Austronesian languages. Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory 10.375-414.
Keenan, Edward. 1995. Predicate-argument structure in Malagasy. Grammatical
relations: Theoretical approaches to empirical questions, ed. by Clifford
Burgess, Katarzyna Dziwirek, and Donna Gerdts, 171-216. Stanford: CSLI.
Keenan, Edward, and Maria Polinsky. 1998. Malagasy morphology. Handbook of
morphology, ed. by Andrew Spencer and Arnold Zwicky, 563-623. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Larson, Richard. 1988. On the double object construction. Linguistic Inquiry
19.335-392.
Marantz, Alec. 1993. Implications of asymmetries in double object constructions.
Theoretical Aspects of Bantu Grammar, ed. by Sam Mchombo, 113-150.
Stanford: CSLI.
Paul, Ileana. 1996a. The active marker and nasals in Malagasy. The Structure of
Malagasy, vol. I, ed. by Matthew Pearson and Ileana Paul, 49-57. Los
Angeles: UCLA Department of Linguistics.
Paul, Ileana. 1996b. The Malagasy genitive. The Structure of Malagasy, vol. I, ed.
by Matthew Pearson and Ileana Paul, 76-91. Los Angeles: UCLA Department
of Linguistics.
Paul, Ileana. 1999. Malagasy clause structure. Doctoral dissertation, McGill
University .
Pearson, Matt. 2001. The clause structure of Malagasy: A minimalist approach.
Doctoral dissertation, UCLA.
Pearson, Matt. to appear. The Malagasy subject/topic as an A' -element. Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory.
Rahajarizafy, Antoine. 1960. Essai de grammaire malgache. Antanimena
Tananarive: Imprimerie Catholique.
Sportiche, Dominique. 1992. Clitics, voice, and spec-head licensing. GLOW
Newsletter 28.46-47.
Travis, Lisa. 1991. Derived objects, inner aspect, and the structure ofVP. Paper
presented at NELS 22.
Travis, Lisa. 1994. Event phrase and a theory of functional categories.
Proceedings of the 1994 Annual Conference of the Canadian Linguistics
Association, ed. by Pllivi Koskinen, 559-569. Toronto: University of Toronto.
Matt Pearson
Linguistics Program, Reed College
3203 SE Woodstock Blvd
Portland, OR 97202
USA
matthew.pearson@reed.edu

243

